Luau Recap: June 2021 (#53)
Roblox/luau: docs/_posts/2021-06-30-luau-recap-june-2021.md

---
layout: single
title:  "Luau Recap: June 2021"
---

Luau is our new language that you can read more about at [https://roblox.github.io/luau](https://roblox.github.io/luau). Most of our team was busy working on improving Luau interaction with Roblox Studio for an upcoming feature this month, but we were able to add typechecking and performance improvements as well!

[Cross-posted to the [Roblox Developer Forum](https://devforum.roblox.com/t/luau-recap-june-2021/).]

## Constraint Resolver

> To improve type inference under conditional expressions and other dynamic type changes (like assignments) we have introduced a new constraint resolver framework into Luau type checker.

Reviewer: Add a simple example? Something like
```lua
function hi(name: string?)
  if (f == nil)
    print("Hello mysterious stranger!")
  else
   print("Hello %s!", name)
  end
end
```

Author: Yeah, I'll add something like this. Sadly, equality operator is a WIP, we have to use `if a` and `if not a` right now.

[Cross-posted to the [Roblox Developer Forum](https://devforum.roblox.com/t/luau-recap-june-2021/).]

## Constraint Resolver

To improve type inference under conditional expressions and other dynamic type changes (like assignments) we have introduced a new constraint resolver framework into Luau type checker.

This framework allows us to handle more complex expressions that combine `and`/`not` operators and type guards.

Type guards support include expressions like:

* `if instance:IsA("ClassName") then`
* `if enum:IsA("EnumName") then`
* `if type(v) == "string" then`

This framework is extensible and we have plans for future improvements with `a == b`/`a ~= b` equality constraints and handling of table field assignments.

It is now also possible to get better type information inside `else` blocks of an `if` statement.

A few examples to see the constraint resolver in action:
```lua
function say_hello(name: string?)
    -- extra parentheses were enough to trip the old typechecker

>     if (name) then 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    if name then 
```

        print("Hello " .. name .. "!")
    else
        print("Hello mysterious stranger!")
    end
end
```
```lua
function say_hello(name: string?, surname: string?)
    -- but now we handle that and more complex expressions as well
    if not (name and surname) then
        print("Hello mysterious stranger!")
    else
        print("Hello " .. name .. " " .. surname .. "!")
    end
end
```

## Typechecking improvements

We have improved the way we handled module `require` calls. Previously, we had a simple pattern match on the `local m = require(...)` statement, but now we have replaced it with a general handling of the function call in any context.

Handling of union types in equality operators was fixed to remove incorrect error reports.

> A new `IsA` function was introduced to check the type of a Roblox Enum.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new `IsA` method was introduced to EnumItem to check the type of a Roblox Enum.
```
